GESTES SPONTANES

###  partie intégrante de la communication :
- gestures “are an integral component of the communicative act of the speaker” (Kendon, 2004; p. 359)
- bougent tous mains quand parlent, mêmes aveugles -> pour leur propre expression ?
    why people gesture as they speak
- These gestures can mark the rhythm of the discourse, strengthen the message or provide additional information to the listener.
- gestures could represent “a second channel that makes successful comprehension more likely” (Goldin-Meadow & Alibali, 2013, p.261).
- pas seulements des gestes manuels : parle quand on marche, porte les courses etc.
- processus intégré : According to the growth point theory, gestures and speech stem from a common thought process (McNeill, 1992; McNeill & Duncan, 2000; McNeill et al., 2008). They would even be controlled by the same motor system (Gentilucci & Dalla Volta, 2008).


EMBODIED COGNITION
######### lien entre mouvement et fonctions cognitives
The movements we make do not only act on the outer world but they also shape our cognitive abilities. A broad range of neurological and behavioral evidences suggest that the motor system is involved in perception, decision making, lexical representation, memory and emotional processes (Barsalou, 2008; Casasanto & Dijkstra, 2010; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Tyler et al., 2003; Wexler,Kosslyn, & Berthoz, 1998).
According to the embodied cognition framework, mental functions are grounded in
sensory-motor processes linked to specific situations (“grounded cognition”, see Barsalou, 2008). Therefore, cognitive representations are not amodal but rather “grounded” in the sensory-motor processes involved in their construction. In knowledge acquisition, as in all experiences, “the brain captures states across the modalities and integrates them with a multimodal representation stored in memory” (Barsalou, 2008, p.618). Wilson, 2002)

####### lien avec la mémoire
In terms of cognitive processes, we can assume that doing gestures during learning is a way to enhance the memory traces associated with learning. According to embodied cognition theories (Barsalou, 2008; Wilson, 2002), cognition emerges in the interaction between the body, the mind and the environment. Memory is defined by every sensory and motor component activated while experiencing the events from daily life (Logan, 1988; Versace et al., 2014). Several memory models are developed according to this idea and usually describe that the number of components of a memory trace can influence its strength (Versace et al., 2014). We can consider that having a supplemental motor component during learning (for the Gesture group) can strengthen the memory trace associated to this learning, if there is enough time (and/or sleeping processing) between learning and retrieval. The embodied cognition theories also suggest that memory is in fact a simulation of previous events (Barsalou, 2009; Barsalou, Pecher, Zeelenberg, Simmons, & Hamann, 2005). 
Dans le cadre de la cognition incarnée et située, nous adoptons l’idée que la majorité de nos activités cognitives sont une ‘réactivation d’états perceptifs, moteurs et introspectifs acquis durant une expérience avec le monde, le corps et la pensée’(‘Simulation is the reenactment of perceptual, motor, and introspective states acquired during experience with the world, body, and mind’, Barsalou, 2008, p. 618).
Adding a motor component to learning may facilitate the simulation process.
Indeed, a stronger activation of the motor system in the former case may create additional components to the memory traces and/or contribute to shape abilities to mentally simulate the function (Barsalou, 2008).


####### mouvement des mains et fonctions cognitives
A growing amount of behavioral and neurophysiological research shows the implication of limb movements in cognitive activities. For example, manual gestures facilitate learning abstract knowledge such as mathematical concepts (Cook et al., 2008; Perry et al., 1988; GoldinEMeadow and Wagner, 2005); 

####### lien entre mouvement et parole
when producing, addressing or rehabilitating spoken language, the whole motor body actually plays a role or could be trained to play it.
Body states accompanying spoken language are manifold and occur at different levels. Speech is often produced while moving the arms or the legs for nonEcommunicative (e.g., talking with a friend while walking on the way to work), or communicative purposes (e.g., pointing to a place or an object). 
language understanding involves motor areas in the brain (e.g., Pulvermüller et al., 2005) and motor systems interact with language comprehension (Glenberg and Kaschak, 2002)
Ce substrat corporel (activité corporelle) (ou « body ground » par écho au terme de « grounded cognition » employé par Barsalou),peut s’envisager sous l’angle de la contrainte situationnelle (mains libres, mains prises, activité manuelle ou de locomotion, effort physique plus ou moins soutenu)

############# mains et parole
Previous work suggests an embodiment of spoken language in limb movements at both conceptual and motor levels. Empirical observations suggest complex, adaptable and scalable links between the two systems.
Previous work showed that these coEoccurrences lead speech and limbs to influence each other. Moving and talking at the same time could be seen as a dual task, especially when limb motions do not serve a communication purpose or when they convey a concurrent message. But they could also be seen as a context integrated in the motor and lexical learning of spoken language and later ‘reenacted’. 
For some authors, speech and manual gestures are integrated in communication (McNeill, 1992). Manual gestures have actually been hypothesized to be precursors of spoken communication (Corballis, 2003; Glenberg and Gallese, 2012).





