Salommbo : Spoken lAnguage in motions Learning and Adaptations of speech coMMunication in the context of BOdy motions 

PROJECT
 The dynamical system involved in speech is anatomically and functionally distinct from the one of arms and legs. But when producing, addressing or rehabilitating spoken language, the whole motor body actually plays a role or could be trained to play it. 
 Previous work suggests an embodiment of spoken language in limb movements at both conceptual and motor levels. Empirical observations suggest complex, adaptable and scalable links between the two systems. These dynamical aspects of speechElimb connection were yet poorly integrated in theories and models of speechEmotion interactions. 
 The breathing system, which is a shared physiological resource between limbs and speech, has however not been systematically investigated as a potential connector between the two systems. addresses the connection between spoken language and both nonEcommunicative (cyclical motions with the arms vs. the legs) and communicative motions (coEspeech hand/arm gestures).WP2 will focus on learning to produce and memorize novel words (object names) with different phonology (new language) or pseudoEwords by: 
(1) investigating how different kind of limb movements (cyclical motion with the arm vs. the legs vs. iconic gestures related to the shape of the object) produced while learning new words affect the way these words are produced (motor learning) and memorized; 
(2) studying the coEevolution of speech and motion in the course of learning; 
(3) analyzing if and how, when both speech and limb motor systems are impaired (Down 
Syndrome), limb movements could still support speech learning and memorization of new 
words.
Both WPs will involve detailed analyses of different parameters of speech production, based mainly on acoustical recordings but also, for a subEpart of WP2, on articulatory motion. The project will also analyze different linguistic levels, including syntactic structure and vocabulary (in spontaneous speech, see WP1). 
Breathing and kinematics of the limbs will be analyzed jointly. The project will thus merge methods from different fields. A last working package, WP3 will aim at adapting these different methods, and provide new ones. 
The results of the project will have an impact for theories of speech production and language. They will also provide insights for education and rehabilitation of speech and language. These aims will be achieved thanks to a close collaboration between the French and German teams who have complementary skills, covering the spectra required for conducting this project. 

BIBLIO
cognition incarnée :
A growing amount of behavioral and neurophysiological research shows the implication of limb movements in cognitive activities. For example, manual gestures facilitate learning abstract knowledge such as mathematical concepts (Cook et al., 2008; Perry et al., 1988; GoldinEMeadow and Wagner, 2005); 
language understanding involves motor areas in the brain (e.g., Pulvermüller et al., 2005) and motor systems interact with language comprehension (Glenberg and Kaschak, 2002). In the ‘grounded’ cognition framework, these results are integrated as evidence that most of our cognitive activities are a “reenactment of perceptual, motor, and introspective states acquired during experience with the world, body, and mind” also called “simulation” (Barsalou, 2008, p. 618; see also Varela et al., 1993; Clark, 
1998). 
These approaches change the perspectives on cognitive abilities, and language in particular (Lakoff, 2012; Glenberg, 2015): to improve our understanding of spoken language, research should embrace the body’s states and situations in which they occur. Learning and memory are core phenomena in this process, leading to a better understanding of the path from experience to cognition. 
Some earlier studies already integrated the physical properties of the speech motor system as a determinant of spoken languages and, in particular, phonological systems (Ohala, 1978; Liljencrants & Lindblom, 1972; Lindblom, 1984). In general, physical properties are still poorly integrated in phonology, pragmatics, syntax or motor control models of speech production (Bohland et al., 2010). 
Body states accompanying spoken language are manifold and occur at different levels. Speech is often produced while moving the arms or the legs for nonEcommunicative (e.g., talking with a friend while walking on the way to work), or communicative purposes (e.g., pointing to a place or an object). 
Previous work showed that these coEoccurrences lead speech and limbs to influence each other. Moving and talking at the same time could be seen as a dual task, especially when limb motions do not serve a communication purpose or when they convey a concurrent message. But they could also be seen as a context integrated in the motor and lexical learning of spoken language and later ‘reenacted’. 
Salammbo is built on interdisciplinary evidence of multiElevel influences of body actions on spoken 
language and on “grounded” approaches of cognition. It will contribute to a better understanding of these influences, their adaptability and learning through the study of adult populations with different profiles, and through the exploration of nonEcommunicative and communicative motions. 
Evidence for the complex, adaptable and scalable links between spoken language and limb movements comes from interdisciplinary research, with different aims and methods. This provides an interdisciplinary scientific background to the project, of which the first innovation is to connect these areas Manual gestures are omnipresent in spoken communication (Feyereisen & deLannoy, 1991)
For some authors, speech and manual gestures are integrated in communication (McNeill, 1992). Manual gestures have actually been hypothesized to be precursors of spoken communication (Corballis, 2003; Glenberg and Gallese, 2012).

LIEN AVEC SPORT
Another body of research focused on the effect of physical effort on speech production with different aims. Physical effort affects the phonetic and phonological properties of speech A clear effect has been observed on prosody. Skutella et al. (2014) found that in faceEtoEface inEdoor biking involving an instructor and a trainee, pitch and verbal rhythm were congruent with posture and movement tempo of the trainer. 
Trouvain & Truong (2015) introduce the ‘Talk and Run’ database involving 23 participants reading different texts before, during, and after running on a treadmill. They recorded speech acoustics and different parameters such as step frequency and heart rate and showed higher speech rate, f0 and longer averaged breath durations in text reading after running than before. Physical activity also impacts spectral properties of phones. Godin & Hansen (2011) found a larger effect of physical activity on nasals than plosives and fricatives while using a stepper. This effect may be related to breathing strategies (e.g., leaving the velar port open to inhale via the nostrils). 
Dual task paradigms involving limb movements and speech production provide additional information to understand the interaction of the two systems. For example, studies on the effect of speaking on the telephone on walking towards a particular local target showed divided attention and strong deviations from the target (Lambert & Muratori, 2012). This can become a real danger, particularly when pedestrians cross a street while talking on the phone, without paying attention to the traffic. 
In general, even if dual tasks studies are manifold they often show a lower cognitive processing speed and slower motion in comparison to comparable single tasks (for a comprehensive review, see AlEYahya et al., 2011). 

Gestures'and'motion'for'lexical'access,'learning'and'memory'
In the Lexical Access Theory, Krauss (1998) postulated that motoric gestures help in the retrieval of words from memory, something which is supported by evidence from several studies. 
For instance, interpreters use beat gestures during simultaneous interpreting (Adam & Castro, 2013) even when they are not visible to the addressee. These gestures often occur during hesitations or utterances with pauses, showing uncertainty of the interpreter, and facilitate word retrieval. Ravizza (2003) found that, when learning rare words, hand tapping during the recall phase favours word retrieval, as compared with being immobile during this phase. 
Body activity can also improve verbal creativity or learning new vocabulary. Oppezzo & Schwartz (2014) investigated the effect of walking vs. sitting in two creativity tests. Participants tremendously improved their performance while walking, or when performing the tests shortly thereafter. The authors did not interpret their results with respect to lexical access explicitly, but the results are congruent with the literature on this topic. 
SchmidtEKassow et al. (2010) compared learning and memorizing the vocabulary of a new language while sitting or biking or walking (SchmidtEKassow et al. 2014). After several sessions of learning, the findings reveal an improved memory of the newly learned vocabulary as well as changes in brain plasticity. Typical% and% atypical% motors% abilities. Speech and limb motions involve two different systems, with different muscles, tissues, bones etc. Obviously, these systems can be trained independently. 
However, it is possible that specific training such as sports practice could transfer from speech to limb and the reverse. How and when this transfer occurs is still not understood. One possibility is that it may occur thanks to breathing. 
Manual gestures, or methods involving the body (see above) are increasingly used in rehabilitating children with DS to improve their communicative skills and acquire speech (cf. Kumin, 2012; Wright et al., 2013). Spoken language abilities in children with developmental delays, including children with DS might be related to 
their motor skills (Houwen et al., 2016; Iverson, 2010). 


RESUME
within the framework of grounded cognition, evidence that sensorimotor processes are involved in cognition, and particularly in spoken language, but limited number of direct investigation of limb movements and speech production. This'investigation'needs'to'be'developed'in'close'connection' to'speech'analyses'to'bring'our'knowledge'of'the'‘body9ground’'of'spoken'language'a'step'further. 
• limb movements and speech share cognitive and physiological processes, with manifold links and adaptations at the executive, learning, memory, and central processing levels. These links and mutual adaptations are, however, still not well understood. Our analysis is that transversal integrated approaches are missing in previous work. For example, the prosodic, phonetic, phonological, lexical, syntactic levels of speech production were often considered independently. 
Communicative and nonEcommunicative limb movements, arm vs. leg movements were discussed separately but not very often compared.  Developing an integrated approach of these different levels is now required to embrace the complexity of the link 
between spoken language and limb movements.  


EXPE PRECEDENTE
Recently, we recorded participants while speaking only, biking only or speaking and biking at the same time with various biking efforts. Acoustical signals, breathing kinematics (Inductance Plethysmography) and limb movements (Optitrack) were recorded synchronously. Preliminary analyses showed that: as physical effort reduces the duration of the breathing cycles, speakers compensated for the shorter temporal window by increasing their speech rate. They also increased loudness and f0 (Fuchs et al., 2015).
direct investigation of the “body ground” on speech production


SALAMMBO
Investigating the close link between speech gestures, breathing and spontaneous speech 
in unconstrained communication (WP1) 
 Investigating the impact of different types of motion (arms, legs, hands), communicative or not, on learning and memorizing the words of a novel language (WP2) 
 Using fundamental knowledge to support applied areas such as foreign language 
learning and speech and language therapy (WP1 and 2). 
) compares the motion of different limbs (arm vs. leg) and of different types (nonEcommunicative and communicative movements) and their impact on breathing and spoken languag 
extends the approach to learning and memorizing new words by linking speech motor learning to lexical learning. 
Salammbo will have an impact on our theoretical understanding of how spoken language is grounded in sensorimotor processes and situational contexts. It will contribute to a further methodological development for studying multimodality and will enhance the ecological validity of the experiments from more to less controlled experimental paradigms. 
 Finally, among the first papers about phonetic properties of speech during or after motion are the ones for speech recognition. Schuller et al. (2013) state: “if physiology parameters can be reliably estimated from a normal speech signal, the door to many, novel and innovative applications is opened.” 
(p. 1506).
